---
layout: post
title: Dark, loud and acid - the future of our ocean       | PART 2 - Loud
subtitle: The overtaking of the marine soundscape
cover-img: [https://images.pexels.com/photos/4666753/pexels-photo-4666753.jpeg]
thumbnail-img: [https://images.pexels.com/photos/3216911/pexels-photo-3216911.jpeg]
share-img: [https://images.pexels.com/photos/3216911/pexels-photo-3216911.jpeg]
tags: [soundscape, ocean, environment]
author: Anandi Tamby
---
**Human activity is drowning out the natural sounds of the ocean, putting marine life at risk. A new study showed that industrial noise from shipping, construction, and resource extraction is disrupting how animals communicate, navigate, and survive in the Anthropocene era. This growing threat spans across all oceans and adds to the pressures of climate change, overfishing, and pollution. Researchers stress that restoring the ocean’s natural soundscape is essential to protecting marine ecosystems for the future.**

In water, sound travels further than light, making it a reliable indicator on one’s surrounding. Over the past years, ocean soundscape is changing drastically over the past years, with anthropogenic noise masking naturally occurring sound. 

##What is the soundscape ?

With sounds coming from waves, rain, wind, and bubbles, the ocean is naturally noisy. The sound of ice breaking, underwater volcanoes, or seismic activity can travel for kilometers, alerting the local fauna. Marine  animals relies on noise for a number of things, like orientation, finding a mate, finding their habitat, or scaring potential competitors. The informations contained in ocean soundscape can be vital for the residents of the sea. Thus, evaluating the anthropogenic effect on ocean noise (named `antropophony’) is essential to understand the preservation of marine biodiversity.

##Antropophony - factors and impacts
Antropophony find its source in two types : deliberate and unintended noise production. Examples of deliberate noise include the scan of the seafloor in search of petroleum, while unintended noise include low-flying airplanes, or traffic on a bridge going over the sea. 
In addition, while antropophony has increased, naturally produced sound is decreasing. The reduction of kelp forest, seagrass beds and coral reefs induce a decrease of vocalizing animals. 
Furthermore, the effect of antropophony is amplified by climate change. Over the past years, the ocean has increased in temperature and decreased in pH (thus becoming more acidic). Unfortunately, noise travels further in warmer and acidic water.

**In short, anthropogenic noise is taking over our oceans. And this noise resonates louder and further than ever before. **

##The effect of Antropophony
Anthropophonic noise can interfere with natural produced sound by overlapping, in a phenomenon called “masking”. Noise coming from ships have been identified to interfere with foraging, traveling, and socializing of marine animals. Due to noise, young fishes struggles to find and avoid predators, leading in increased mortality. They also have a hard time finding to find a settlement and care for larvae. 
Determining the effect of anthropophony is difficult. It requires complex equipment, and lengthy studies, and the lack of standardization in this field make it even harder to assess long-term effect. Some marine mammals have been identified to cope with anthropophony by producing sound at a different frequency, or by avoiding noisy area. However the long-term effects on marine life still remained to be elucidated. Scientists call for pro-environmental organizations to consider athropophony as a polluant that needs to be addressed in marine guidelines, laws, and policies.  

On a personal note, I would like to attract attention to the [International Quiet Ocean experiment (IQOE)](https://iqoe.org/links/websites) which advocate for research on the marine soundscape. 

Paula Rey Baquero, M., Parcerisas, C., Seger, K. D., Perazio, C., Botero Acosta, N., Mesa, F., Luna-Acosta, A., & Botteldooren, D. (2021). Comparison of Two Soundscapes. 34(4), 62–65.[link] (https://doi.org/10.2307/27217344)
Duarte, C. M., Chapuis, L., Collin, S. P., Costa, D. P., Devassy, R. P., Eguiluz, V. M., Erbe, C., Gordon, T. A. C., Halpern, B. S., Harding, H. R., Havlik, M. N., Meekan, M., Merchant, N. D., Miksis-Olds, J. L., Parsons, M., Predragovic, M., Radford, A. N., Radford, C. A., Simpson, S. D., … Juanes, F. (2021). [link](The soundscape of the Anthropocene ocean. Science.)
 

